
Ptoke - The Linux Pbasic Tokenizer Front end for BASIC Stamp II



Brief Description:

This is a Linux command line utility to preprocess, tokenize, and "burn"
PBasic source files to Parallax Inc.'s Basic Stamp II series of
microprocessors.



Instalation:

Please read the INSTALL file.



Requirements:

PBASIC_Tokenizer.tar.gz library installed.  This can be found at:
http://www.parallax.com/html_pages/downloads/tokenizer/tokenizer.asp

m4 is not required, but to make life easier while working on big projects I 
suggest making sure its in your path ( you'd be surprised how much 
memory a stamp 2e has...)  m4 is a text macro preprocessor that provides
sanity for large projects.


This library must be specially installed, please read: INSTALL



Background:

This development project is designed to be a gcc-like front end to the
recently released "tokenizer.so"  ELF shared library, from Parallax Inc.
Parallax Inc., of which I have no affiliation, produces a series of small
dip-style microprocessor chips( complete with RAM, EEPROM, CLOCK, etc.) ,
known collectively as "Basic Stamps"  This set of low-cost chips is
tailored for hobbyist, and the like.  They are used by many schools,
higher educational institutions, scientists, for teaching and other small
applications.  (Search the web for Robot+Basic+Stamp and you'll find
hundreds of sites featuring these nifty little microprocessor)

These processors are programmed via a RS-232C serial connection to the
chip.  They contain a "Pbasic" interpreter on-board, and hence use a java
byte code like version of a simple (brain-dread?) BASIC language.  In order
to program these suckers, you first write Pbasic source file, tokenize the
source code and transmit it via the serial port to the chip itself.

For years, the only way to do this was on from a computer w/ DOS or
Windows OS, running the proprietary Parallax Inc.'s Stamp Editor Program.
Hence, a pain in the butt to a Linux nut, like myself.  I emailed Parallax
regarding this, got a reply with hopeful news of a answer soon.  Six
months pasted and in October, 2002, Parallax released a tokenizer library
for the ELF Shared Library format.  The peasants rejoiced.  This was a
library to provide a programmer with just the "tokenizer" and "packetizer"
part of the above described scheme.

This project was started by me to provide a open source wrapper to this  
library. It provides the source m4 preprocessing, and a uart low level to the
chip.  This allows Linux folk to program there Stamps with a Gcc-like
tokenizer, and download the resulting tokenized object file to there
hardware.  I've begun adding some additional ptoke preproccesor directives to
make life a bit easier when writing large, complex pbasic source. (for
example, ptoke optionally pulls slot numbers and module types for source
directives. 

This wrapper is written in C, and should compile with most Linux systems
with getopt, ioctl, and the rest of the normal stuff.  It compiles on C
and has been limtedly tested with gcc 2.96 in Linux Kernel 2.4.2-2, using
Red Hat's Linux 7.1 distribution.

Brett M. Gordon
beretta@eohio.net













